Grandson of pioneering black
 Minneapolis cop sues police
 department
 LIBOR JANY OCTOBER , 
The grandson of Minneapolis' first African-American female cop has sued
 the city's police department, saying his rough treatment during a February
 traffic stop left him with emotional scars and a broken finger.
 Rico McKinnies alleged in his excessive force lawsuit that not only did he
 suffer "stress, fear, shame, humiliation, and embarrassment" from the Feb. 8
 episode, but that he also lost wages and incurred medical expenses.
 McKinnies is the grandson of Deoloris "Dee" Dunn, who joined the
 department in 1975 as its first black female officer after answering a
 classified job ad. She spent 18 years on the force before retiring with the
 rank of sergeant.
 After Dunn's death in January — several weeks before the stop involving her
 grandson occurred — Police Chief Medaria Arradondo remembered her as a
 "true pioneer" whose "perseverance, professionalism and leadership paved
 the way for many women."
 The suit, filed last month and later moved to federal court, lists as co
defendants the city of Minneapolis and the three officers who were at the
 scene: Rachel Reiersgord, Chad Conner and J. Spies. It seeks more than
 $50,000 in damages.
A police spokeswoman said Monday that the department's policy is to not
 comment on pending litigation.
 In its response, filed Monday, attorneys for the city said that McKinnies
 repeatedly refused to produce his driver's license and proof of insurance
 when asked, and that he started resisting as he was being led into the police
 squad. The city denied most of McKinnies' allegations, including that the
 officers used excessive force on him.
 On the night in question, McKinnies was pulled over by Reiersgord and
 Connor for an unspecified traffic violation in the area of N. 34th Avenue
 and 6th Street, his attorney said. McKinnies denied any wrongdoing and
 asked to speak with the officers' supervisor, to no avail. Shortly afterward,
 Spies arrived and the officers conferred with one another on how to proceed,
 as McKinnies dialed 911 to request a supervisor come to the scene, the suit
 said.
 The officers later ordered McKinnies out of the car and cuffed his hands
 behind his back, the suit alleged.
 Even though McKinnies said that he wasn't resisting, Spies began twisting
 his fingers as the officer shoved him into the back seat of a police squad. In
 doing so, the officer fractured one of McKinnies' fingers, causing him to cry
 out in pain, the lawsuit contends. According to McKinnies, neither of the
 other two officers intervened when this happened, and only then was a
 supervising sergeant called to the scene.
 "His grandmother taught him that if he feels something suspicious was
 going on, he should ask for a supervisor, and that's what he did in this case,"
 said his attorney, Zorislav Leyderman, referring to Dunn.
"How does a person end up with a broken finger after the police officer's
 attempts to place them in a squad?" He said body camera footage of the
 encounter exists.
 A pretrial conference is set for Thursday. When reached for comment
 Monday, Lt. Bob Kroll, police union president, said that he hadn't seen the
 suit and couldn't comment.