3/3/2021
 Minneapolis must pay more than $410,000 for cop's fights - StarTribune.com
 MINNEAPOLIS
 Judge orders Minneapolis to pay more
 than $410K in suits against same officer
 The two police brutality suits filed against the officer will cost more
 than $410,000. 
By Matt McKinney (https://www.startribune.com/matt-mckinney/6370539/) Star Tribune
 MARCH 10, 2014 — 7:36AM
 A judge’s order in a Minneapolis police brutality suit last week pushed the city’s bill to
 $410,653.33 for two lawsuits filed against police officer Michael Griffin.
 The suits, one stemming from a 2010 incident and the other from 2011, both involve
 cases in which Griffin was off-duty and at downtown bars when he allegedly punched or
 kicked people who did not want to fight him. Three people were hospitalized as a result
 of the incidents, including one man who was unconscious and bleeding for more than
 five minutes, according to one of the lawsuits.
 Griffin remains a patrol officer in the Fourth Precinct on the city’s North Side, according
 to a department spokesman. The status of an internal affairs review of the incidents was
 not immediately available Friday.
 Griffin was awarded the department’s medal of valor last year for his response to the
 2012 Accent Signage killings, when he was among the first officers to arrive at the scene
 of the mass workplace shooting.
 The Star Tribune reported last summer that of 95 payouts totaling $14 million for police
 misconduct since 2006, only eight of the cases led to discipline for police officers.
 The city’s latest bill arrived Thursday, when U.S. District Court Judge David Doty
 ordered the city to pay $145,653.33 in attorney’s fees for the lawsuit brought by Jeremy
 Axel, an IT salesman from St. Louis Park who was knocked unconscious by Griffin on
 Nov. 4, 2011. In December, a federal jury awarded Axel $125,000 in his excessive-force
 claim against the officer.
 And last month, the Minneapolis City Council approved a $140,000 settlement with
 Ibrahim Regai, who alleged that he was threatened, followed, then punched and knocked
 to the ground by Griffin outside a Minneapolis bar May 29, 2010.
 The three payments total $410,653.33 and together amount to one of the larger payouts
 the city has made for the actions of one officer.
 First incident at bar closing
 The altercation involving Regai began outside a downtown Minneapolis bar after closing
 time, according to the suit. An argument between a husband and wife caused problems
 for Griffin, who was friends with the husband, and Regai, who was friends with the wife.
 Griffin flashed his badge and warned Regai that he could be arrested.
 Regai left the area and walked to nearby nightclub Envy where he worked as a part-time
 employee. He went to an employee’s entrance and rang the doorbell, but when the door
 didn’t open, he turned around to face Griffin. A surveillance camera took pictures of the
 scene as Regai approached Griffin with his hands out at his sides. Regai said in his suit
 that he said he didn’t want to fight, but Griffin swung and knocked Regai to the ground.
 Griffin then summoned a nearby Minneapolis police officer and had Regai arrested for
 assault on a police officer. That charge was later dropped.
 The 2011 case
 STAR TRIBUNE FILE
 Michael Griffin remains a patrol officer in the
 Fourth Precinct on the city’s North Side even
 after two lawsuits were filed against him for
 1/2
 https://www.startribune.com/minneapolis-must-pay-more-than-410-000-for-cop-s-fights/249221501/
3/3/2021
 Minneapolis must pay more than $410,000 for cop's fights - StarTribune.com
 More than a year later, Griffin was at the Loop Bar and Restaurant in downtown
 Minneapolis when Axel’s group asked Griffin, who was wearing civilian clothes, to move
 so that Axel could join his friends.
 Griffin and Axel’s group got into an argument. At the time, no one in Axel’s group knew
 that Griffin was a police officer.
 When Axel and his two friends left the bar, Griffin followed, making threats. Axel got
 into a cab, but two of his friends were stopped by Minneapolis police officer William
 Gregory, who arrived in a squad car.
 Axel said in his suit that he saw Griffin hit one of his friends, so he stepped out of the cab
 to check on his friend. Griffin then punched Axel in the head, knocking him out, then
 picked up the unconscious Axel and kicked him in the face, according to the suit. Axel,
 who does not have a criminal record, suffered a concussion, had to have several teeth
 replaced and lost three to four days of work, his attorney said.
 The lawsuit made three claims against Griffin: excessive force, battery and false
 imprisonment. The jury agreed with Axel that excessive force was used, but ruled in
 favor of officers Griffin and Gregory on the other claims.
 Matt McKinney is a reporter on the Star Tribune's state team. In 15 years at the Star Tribune, he has
 covered business, agriculture and crime. 
mckinney@startribune.com 
612-673-7329 
_mattmckinney
 2/2
 https://www.startribune.com/minneapolis-must-pay-more-than-410-000-for-cop-s-fights/249221501/